Looking at hash functions we can start to think about what actions they perform and how fast it can
be done.
When it comes to inserting something in our memory space well it's going to be 0 of 1.
We hash the key such as grapes through the hash function and places it automatically into the address
space that it comes up with.
Look up is the exact same.
We access the property that property is gonna get hashed and direct us exactly to the address to find
the values.
What about deletes.
Same thing.
We simply use the key.
Right away we know where to delete the item from and because it isn't ordered.
We don't have to shift indexes like we did with arrays.
Everything is just nice and simple.
What about searching.
If we want to find something in our basket like apples.
Well that's easy too.
We simply use hash functions if we go to our playground in Javascript.
I can create an object let's say let user and this user will have property of each 50 for let's say
that the name is going to be Kylie
magic.
Well let's say Kylie does have magic skills.
So I'll set it to true and for fun.
Let's say that the scream is a function that will just console that log a scream.
That was not the strongest of screams but I don't want to scare people around me when I run this I've
created a user object and the age 54 named Kylie.
Magic true scream and dysfunction are all going to get placed somewhere in memory.
Different addresses but I can access this really really fast I can say user dot age which is going to
give me 54 at one time perhaps adding a new property I can just simply say user dot spell is going to
equal Abra dad Deborah and if I run this and let's just check out what the user object gives us we see
that we now have the spell abracadabra added.
This again is access of 0 1 is 0 of 1 because we take it through the hash functions and the computer
decides where to put both spell and abracadabra in memory and if I am user dot scream same thing I cannot
spell scream.
Same thing I get R I get to access this function in memory really really fast at 0 of 1 How amazing
is that and I know where you're thinking hash tables are amazing we should be using them all the time
and you're right we should be using them in a lot of cases but as we know there's always pros and cons.
Now let me talk to you about one of the main problems with hash tables and I have a nice visual to demonstrate
this for you.
I'll link to this and this video so you can play around with it later.
I have a little animation here where we have twelve memory spaces remember our computer has limited
space and when we create an object or a hash table The computer decides how much space to allocate.
It's not going to allocate all the space to the hash table it's going to allocate a bit of it and I'll
show you later on when we implement our own hash table how we can adjust the size but seeing that there's
only twelve spaces you can imagine if I insert here let's say 1 see if I can make this bigger so you
can see it.
Yeah.
There you go I'm going to insert let's say the number three gets inserted here.
Let's do 55 insert it.
Oh what happened there.
Do you see that the hash function randomly assigned a space in memory and put it in 3 0 remember.
There's nothing telling the hash function to evenly distribute until everything is full although hash
functions are optimized to try to distribute this data all over.
It also matters what we put into it.
So when fifty five gets hashed Well this hash function generates the address location of three to put
it.
And because we already have three there it does something funny here.
Let's keep adding here and see what happens.
I'll add two maybe add twelve and finally add 14 0.
It did the same thing again and what we just notice here is something called collision
and a collision looks something like this.
We have the keys.
Let's say where inserting the name and the phone number of a user and we initially place John Smith.
This key gets hashed gets placed in the address space of 150 to and gets stored.
Remember how I said it actually stores both keys and values it stores in something called buckets.
John Smith with the value that is its phone number right here and then we keep going with Lisa Smith
then Sam doe then Sandra.
Oh no.
As soon as we has Sandra D it becomes the same address space as John Smith and we have a collision and
because of this collision we need a way to store both users somehow in this address space and something
funky is going on here with this little circle and then a point and Sandra D and just a hint here.
This is actually a new data structure that we're going to learn about called link lists coming up.
You see with hash tables we can't avoid these collisions with enough data with limited memory.
We're always going to have this collision.
So there is a possibility if we go back to our example and I refresh here to start from scratch that
we constantly just add despite our hash table that's really really fast costly just keep adding to the
same memory space which slows down our ability to access or insert information.
Because now if I want to check what's in this address space I have to go one two three four five and
so on and so forth.
Theoretically when you have a collision it slows down reading and writing with a hash table with o n
divided by K where k is the size of your hash table and remember because we remove constants and simplify
things it becomes an oh an operation now collision will likely happen in any hash table implementation.
And luckily for you you're never going to have to really implemented yourself and it's not a very common
interview question but you do want to know about it so you can talk about it there's two common ways
to deal with these collisions.
I showed you one of them with something called Link List which we'll talk about later on.
But if we go to the hash table Wikipedia page and look at collision resolution you can see that there's
a ton of different ways to solve collisions the way that I showed you is called separate chaining but
there's different methods like open addressing and Robinhood hashing that you can read about if you're
really interested in the topic.
The point I wanted to make is that there is a bit of a of a downside when we talk about fast lookups
and hash tables occasionally depending on the hash function it might take oh of N.
All right let's keep going and expand our knowledge of hash tables in the next video.